The irony of broken windows policing: A micro-place study of the relationship
between disorder, focused police crackdowns and fear of crime
Joshua C. Hinkle a,⁎, David Weisburd b,c
a
b
c

Department of Criminology and Criminal Justice, University of Maryland, College Park, 2220 LeFrak Hall, College Park, MD 20742, United States
Institute of Criminology, Faculty of Law, Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel
Administration of Justice Department, George Mason University, Bull Run Hall Room 301a, 10900 University Boulevard MS 4f4, Manassas, VA 20110, United States

In their seminal “Broken Windows” article in Atlantic Monthly, J. Q. Wilson and G. L. Kelling (1982) suggested
that police could more effectively ﬁght crime by targeting minor offenses. They hypothesized that untended
disorder increases fear of crime in a community, starting a chain of events that eventually leads to
heightened levels of crime. By targeting disorder, police can thus circumvent this cycle of neighborhood
decline (Skogan, 1990). This study aimed to improve knowledge of the relationship between disorder and
fear of crime in the context of the broken windows hypothesis by using a micro-place level research design
involving a police crackdown on disorder and minor crime at hot spots. The results of the current study
suggest that perceived social disorder and observed levels of physical disorder have a strong impact on fear of
crime. This conﬁrms the relationship between disorder and fear hypothesized by the broken windows
literature, and implies that police may be able to reduce fear of crime by reducing disorder. It was also found,
however, that the police intervention itself signiﬁcantly increased the probability of feeling unsafe.
Accordingly, any fear reduction beneﬁts gained by reducing disorder may be offset by the fact that the
policing strategies employed simultaneously increase fear of crime. These ﬁndings suggest the importance of
a careful focus on “how” broken windows policing programs are implemented. Such programs must be
geared not only to reduce disorder, but also to prevent increases in citizen fear that accompany crackdowns
and other intensive enforcement efforts associated with broken windows policing.
© 2008 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Introduction
Broken windows policing has emerged as one of the most
important policing strategies of the past two decades (Bratton &
Knobler, 1998; Giuliani & Kurson, 2002; Karmon, 2000; Kelling &
Sousa, 2001; Maple & Mitchell, 1999; Silverman, 1999; Weisburd &
Braga, 2006). Its main thesis is that the targeting of disorder and
nuisance crimes (which generally gained little police attention in the
reactive, professional model of policing) provides the key to the longterm reduction of violent crime. Broken windows policing was ﬁrst
broached in a seminal article by James Q. Wilson and George Kelling
published in the Atlantic Monthly in 1982. The idea of broken windows
policing, however, can be traced more generally to what some have
called the incivilities thesis (Taylor, 1999a). The incivilities thesis
posits that disorder in a community leads to fear of crime among
residents, which in turn leads them to withdraw from the community.

The result is a decline in the neighborhood's level of informal social
control which is hypothesized to cause crime in the area to increase in
frequency and severity.
Scholars who have advocated broken windows policing have not
suggested a speciﬁc strategy for police to prevent decline in
communities. Rather, they have identiﬁed a series of methods that
focus on reducing decline through police crackdowns on minor
offenses and disorder (Kelling & Sousa, 2001). Such methods have
included issuing citations and arrests for disorderly behavior, loitering, and any number of other disorders and minor crimes that the
police are likely to ignore in standard policing practices (e.g., Kelling &
Sousa, 2001; Worrall, 2002). Strategies have also included problemoriented policing methods designed to get at the root causes of these
types of social disorders and/or to attack physical disorders, such as
dilapidated buildings and abandoned lots, through strategies such as
code enforcement and community development (Kelling & Sousa,
2001; Skogan, 1990).
Looking at broken windows policing and the broken windows
thesis, it is apparent that the link between disorder and fear is a key
component. Using the logic of this hypothesis, if disorder is not linked
to fear, citizens will be unlikely to withdraw from the community.

Informal social controls will not be weakened, and criminals would
not be expected to increase their activities in the neighborhood in the
framework of this model. Thus without the link between disorder and
fear, the underlying assumptions of the broken windows perspective
are challenged. While past studies had examined the link between
disorder and fear (for example, see Covington & Taylor, 1991;
Markowitz, Bellair, Liska, & Liu, 2001; Robinson, Lawton, Taylor, &
Perkins, 2003; Skogan, 1990) most of these studies examined the
relationship in large geographic areas and/or not involved a police
intervention. This is unfortunate as it is reasonable to assume that the
level of disorder in one's immediate surroundings (i.e., the block on
which an individual resides) is most apt to inﬂuence their level of fear
as an individual will have the most direct exposure to events that
occur in the areas where they spend most of their time.
Additionally, it is important from the perspective of the broken
windows thesis to examine the relationship between disorder and
fear in the context of a police intervention involving crackdowns on
disorder, as the thrust of Wilson and Kelling's (1982) seminal article
was that police can better reduce fear and crime by targeting
incivilities. While the broken windows idea certainly is relevant to
the development of communities irrespective of policing approaches
(see Skogan, 1990), Wilson and Kelling clearly saw the police as a
central part of community efforts to prevent the cycle of fear and
crime by targeting disorder, stating that “(t)hough citizens can do a
great deal, the police are clearly the key to order maintenance” (p. 36)
and that “we must return to our long abandoned view that the police
ought to protect communities as well as individuals” (p. 38). As such,
an important question to answer is whether focused police crackdowns in disorder hot spots can reduce fear of crime among residents
of the targeted areas. As will be reviewed below, empirical studies of
broken windows policing have focused on crime reduction and have
not examined its impact on fear.
The current study sought to focus speciﬁcally on the effect of police
crackdowns on citizen fear of crime at a micro-place level of analysis.
The use of observed measures of physical and social disorder as well as
residents' perceptions of disorder on street segments allowed for an
assessment of not only the effect of disorder on fear, but importantly,
also allowed for an assessment of the impact that police efforts to
reduce disorder have on fear of crime. The latter question is one that a
number of scholars have raised in recent years, though to date there
has been little systematic investigation on the impact of focused
policing strategies on residents living in targeted areas (Braga, 2001;
Rosenbaum, 2006; Weisburd, 2004; Weisburd & Braga, 2003).
Rosenbaum (2006) notes that “[i]n some cases, the stigma of being a
hot spot of crime may stimulate greater fear of crime among
residents” (p. 254). This point is especially important in relation to
broken windows policing strategies because, if true, it means that
focused policing crackdowns on disorder may actually increase fear of
crime, and thus offset any fear reduction beneﬁts that may be gained
by reducing disorder.
The incivilities thesis
Wilson and Kelling (1982) suggested that untended disorder
makes residents fearful as they conclude that social control has
broken down in the neighborhood. Thus residents eventually withdraw from the community, lowering the level of informal social
control. This in turn causes more disorder to occur, and may even
cause crime to increase as local criminals step up their offending as
they conclude that social control is low and that their chances of being
caught are slim. As the cycle worsens, criminals from outside areas
may move their activities into the neighborhood as they too may
perceive their risk of capture to be low. Wilson and Kelling's (1982)
hypothesis is interpreted graphically below in Fig. 1.
While a link between disorder and fear of crime is interesting on its
own merits, it is even more crucial to understand as it is a major

Fig. 1. The broken windows hypothesis.

component of various versions of the incivilities thesis (Kelling &
Coles, 1996; Skogan, 1990; Wilson & Kelling, 1982), which have had a
large impact on policing strategies over the past two decades. Wilson
and Kelling (1982) argued that simple disorder indicators, like broken
windows, can foster crime in a community if left untended. As such,
they suggested that police should focus resources on cracking down
on disorder and minor crimes before they cause serious crime
problems to arise in a neighborhood.
While broken windows theories emphasize the importance of the
link between disorder and fear of crime, a review of the literature
suggests that interest in the topic was not introduced by broken
windows theorists, but rather was sparked in large part by numerous
studies which found that fear of crime did not appear to be linked to
ofﬁcial crime rates or actual victimization risks. This conclusion was
best illustrated by studies that found that the groups in society who
were the most fearful of crime were older residents and females (see
Ferraro, 1995, chapters 6 and 7, for a review of literature on these
topics). This generated interest in the topic as younger males have
consistently been found to be the most victimized age/gender group
(as well as the most active offending group) in the National Crime
Surveys conducted by the Bureau of Justice Statistics (2005).
Other studies compared crime rates and levels of fear across
neighborhoods and found that the level of fear was not clearly
correlated with the neighborhoods' level of crime, as the highest
crime areas did not exhibit the highest levels of fear (Lewis & Salem,
1986). The notion that fear of crime is not tied to crime rates or
victimization risks was further supported by the observation that
although fear goes up as crime goes up, it does not fall as rapidly when
crime declines (Taylor & Hale, 1986). These ﬁndings naturally led
criminologists to question what factors were driving fear of crime if it
was not just actual victimization risk or neighborhood crime rates.
Much research on this topic suggested that fear of crime may be
more inﬂuenced by minor crimes and other public nuisances that
many have termed disorder or incivilities. Wilson (1975) suggested
that people are not only troubled by crimes but also by:
The daily hassles they are confronted with on the street—street
people, panhandlers, rowdy youths, or ‘hey honey’ hassles—and
the deteriorated conditions that surround them—trash strewn
alleys and vacant lots, grafﬁti, and deteriorated or abandoned
housing—inspire concern. (p. 66)
Similarly, Garofalo and Laub (1978) stated that “…what has been
measured in research as the ‘fear of crime’ is not simply fear of
crime” (p. 245) and tie fear to quality of life and concern for the
community. Hunter (1978) formulated a model through which
disorder and incivilities affected both crime and fear of crime.
Hunter hypothesized that disorder and incivilities produce fear in
residents because they feel that the external agencies of control have
failed to preserve the order. Thus as residents perceive that matters
are out of the control of local agencies, they begin to feel personally
at risk of victimization. Hunter also suggested that this will increase
crime, which in turn will further increase fear. Hunter's work can be
viewed as the groundwork for the broken windows thesis (Wilson &
Kelling, 1982).


Support for the relationship between disorder and crime
While many argue that there is strong theoretical support for the
broken windows perspective (Kelling & Coles, 1996), the argument has
also been subject to substantial critique. Sampson and Raudenbush
(1999) and Harcourt (2001) have argued that there is not evidence of a
direct relationship between disorder and more serious crime, and that
this lack of a direct relationship is a major blow to the broken windows
hypothesis. This is a reasonable criticism as the lack of a relationship
between disorder and crime would essentially refute the utility of
policing strategies focusing on disorder. More recent work has
responded to this critique by stating that broken windows theory
does not argue for a direct relationship between disorder and crime,
but rather that the theory has always asserted that the relationship is
indirect through fear of crime and its accompanying impact on
informal social controls (Bratton & Kelling, 2006; Xu, Fiedler, &
Flaming, 2005).
Longitudinal work has also challenged the link between disorder
and crime. Ralph Taylor (1999b, 2001) assessed the link between
disorder and crime in his study of street blocks in Baltimore with
panel data collected thirteen years apart. While Taylor found evidence
of a link between disorder and crime, he argued that disorder did not
have a particularly strong impact on block-level crime changes over
time when compared with initial community structure or crime rates.
In another study using sixteen years of census block-level data
collected in Seattle, Yang (2007) found that the trends between violent
crime and disorder were correlated. The direction of causation,
however, was opposed to what was suggested by the broken windows
thesis. The results from Granger causality tests generally showed no
causal relationship between disorder and violence, and in a few
places, the causality appeared to run from violent crime to disorders.
Support for the relationship between disorder and fear
While the above discussion centered on the relationship between
disorder and crime, as noted earlier, the relationship between disorder
and fear is a key link in the broken windows hypothesis and in every
variation of the incivilities thesis. Several studies, including some of
those mentioned above, examined the link between disorder and fear
of crime. In general, these studies found support for a link between
disorder and fear (Covington & Taylor, 1991; Markowitz et al., 2001;
Robinson et al., 2003; Taylor, 1999b, 2001), and in some analyses,
disorder was found to be the dominant effect in the model.
These studies, however, had several important limitations. First,
with the exception of Taylor's (1999b, 2001) block-level study in
Baltimore, most studies that examined the relationship between
disorder and fear of crime did so with a large geographic unit of
analysis. It is reasonable to assume that an individual's level of fear is
most likely to be determined by the levels of disorder, crime, and other
factors in the areas where they spend most of their time. As such, a
more micro-place unit of analysis centered on the street segment on
which a resident lives is likely to be a more appropriate context for
examining the impact of disorder on fear of crime. Second, these
studies did not test the broken windows thesis in the context of a
police intervention. The current study addressed these issues by
examining residents' fear of crime at the street-segment level after an
intensive police crackdown on minor offenses. This will be described
in more detail below.

505

have been relatively few empirical studies of the impacts of broken
windows policing efforts. Moreover, given the key role of fear in the
broken windows thesis outlined above, it is unfortunate that empirical
tests of broken windows policing have been largely limited to
examining its impact on crime and disorder.
For instance, Kelling and Sousa (2001) examined the relationship
between misdemeanor arrests and crime in seventy-six New York City
Police Department precincts from 1989-1998. To control for possible
confounding they used a multivariate multilevel modeling approach
in which the precincts were nested in city boroughs. Based on their
ﬁndings, Kelling and Sousa estimated that one violent crime was
prevented for every twenty-eight disorder arrests in New York City.
This would account for 60,000 violent crimes prevented in NYC from
1989-1998. In work taking a different approach to the issue Golub,
Johnson, and Taylor (2003) conducted interviews with NYC arrestees
in 1999 and found that most were aware of the police crackdown on
disorder and that nearly half had reported stopping or cutting back on
their disorderly behavior as a result. As such, they suggested that
broken windows policing has a deterrent impact.
Other studies, however, were less favorable. For example, in an
analysis of data from NYC in the 1990s, Harcourt and Ludwig (2006)
challenged the conclusions of Kelling and Sousa (2001) by suggesting
that the crime declines they attributed to broken windows policing
were likely due to simple mean reversion. Another study analyzed
data from NYC from 1988-2001 and found that while ordermaintenance policing did have signiﬁcant impacts on robbery and
homicide rates, the reductions were relatively modest (Rosenfeld,
Fornango, & Rengifo, 2007). Yet another study of NYC's use of ordermaintenance policing in the 1990s found the tactic had a signiﬁcant
effect on gun-related homicide, but not for murders not involving a
ﬁrearm (Messner et al., 2007). In addition to this mixed empirical
evidence, other scholars have argued that the crime decline in NYC
during the 1990s simply mirrored national trends and was likely a sign
of such factors as the decline of the crack cocaine epidemic rather than
any policing efforts (Eck & Maguire, 2000). In this regard, Messner
et al. (2007) found that changes in cocaine use were related to crime
rates over this period, but that order-maintenance policing still had a
signiﬁcant impact on gun-related homicides after controlling for
changes in drug use.
Finally, empirical studies in areas besides NYC have reported
limited evidence of the effectiveness of broken windows policing. For
instance, Sherman (1990) found that increased enforcement of public
drinking laws and parking regulations had no impact on serious
crime; Novak, Hartman, Holsinger, and Turner (1999) found that
increased patrols for disorderly behavior did not reduce burglary or
robbery rates; and Katz, Webb, and Schaefer (2001) found that
quality-of-life policing reduced disorder and public morals offenses
such as prostitution, but had no impact on crime. Worrall (2002), on
the other hand, found misdemeanor arrests and ﬁlings to be
signiﬁcantly and negatively related to the property crime rate in a
county-level study in California.
A possible reason for the equivocal evidence on the effectiveness of
broken windows policing is that the broken windows thesis does not
provide a clear model for when crime will be reduced. As such, studies
that failed to ﬁnd a direct impact of disorder policing on crime in this
context may be criticized for not taking a “long enough view” of
community change. For this reason, it is crucial to examine a critical
intervening variable in the broken windows policing model—the
effect of these policing efforts on citizen fear of crime.

Broken windows policing
Past studies of police impact on fear
While broken windows policing is widely perceived as an
important and effective new policing strategy, and has been given
credit in good part for the crime drop in New York City in the 1990s
(Bratton & Knobler, 1998; Giuliani & Kurson, 2002; Karmon, 2000;
Kelling & Sousa, 2001; Maple & Mitchell, 1999; Silverman, 1999), there

Some past studies have examined the impact police can have on
fear. Speciﬁcally, many studies of community-oriented policing have
found effects on fear of crime even when effects on crime were lacking
(see Committee to Review Research on Practice and Policy, 2004;


Weisburd & Eck, 2004 for reviews). Additionally, some police
programs were designed with fear reduction in mind and empirical
evaluations revealed that such efforts can reduce citizen fear (for
example, see Cordner, 1986). Studies of other types of police strategies
such as use of military gear and tactics, however, have been found to
increase fear of crime (Kraska & Kappeler, 1997). As such it is apparent
that what the police do is likely to have an impact on residents' fear of
crime, and the type of tactics employed may determine whether this is
a positive or negative impact.
Unfortunately, as noted above, evaluations of broken windows
policing programs have neglected testing its impacts on fear of crime.
Additionally, the impact of speciﬁc policing strategies on residents of
targeted areas in general is lacking in past studies, as noted in recent
reviews and commentaries (Braga, 2001; Rosenbaum, 2006; Weisburd,
2004; Weisburd & Braga, 2003). As mentioned above, Rosenbaum
(2006) even suggested that labeling an area a “hot spot” for crime and/or
disorder may instill fear among residents in and of itself. This is a crucial
issue for broken windows policing as the strategy is likely to involve
cracking down on disorder and minor crimes in areas exhibiting high
levels of these phenomenon. If the police strategy itself increases fear of
crime, it may well offset any fear reduction beneﬁts gained by the police
crackdown lowering the level of disorder. The current study allowed for
an assessment of this issue.
The current study
The above review of the literature on the broken windows
hypothesis/incivilities thesis shows that the suggested link between
disorder and fear is a key component of the theory. If this link is not
present, the theory is challenged as the rest of the causal chain of
events is unlikely to occur as hypothesized without this link. Disorder
may still be related to crime, but if it does not impact fear of crime,
then it is not related to crime in the speciﬁc manner suggested by
Wilson and Kelling (1982). In such a case, the focusing of police
resources on disorder may be misguided and unlikely to have the
intended impacts on fear and serious crime, even if the police are able
to reduce disorder. The current study examined the link between
disorder and individual fear of crime at the micro level following a
police crackdown on disorder in an effort to better understand the
relationship between these variables in the context of the broken
windows thesis.
Data for the analyses in this article are drawn from a larger study
that focused on displacement and diffusion outcomes resulting from
police crackdowns on crime hot spots in Jersey City, New Jersey
(Weisburd et al., 2004, 2006). Two small target areas consisting of
twenty-one and twelve street segments respectively were identiﬁed
for intervention, on the basis of there being a signiﬁcant street
prostitution problem in the ﬁrst area and a drug and violent crime
problem in the second. Special units were assigned to each of these
areas for an experimental period, and a variety of police activities
including crackdowns and opportunity reducing interventions (e.g.,
street closures or closing down of abandoned buildings) were brought
to each target area. While the program did not deﬁne itself as taking a
broken windows policing approach, it did focus strongly on reducing
disorder-related activities and incivilities in the areas targeted. For
each of these sites, catchment areas for measuring displacement and
diffusion of sixty-nine and sixty-seven street segments respectively
were deﬁned and included in data collection efforts. These catchment
areas did not gain extra police presence, and police activities were
carefully monitored to avoid spillover of policing strategies into the
catchment areas.
The design of the original study provided an opportunity to
examine how intensive police crackdowns geared to reducing
disorder and crime inﬂuence ordinary citizens living on the street
blocks affected as compared with street segments that did not receive
any special police intervention. Target areas and catchment areas in

the original study, however, were not necessarily similar in their
characteristics. Indeed, there were important differences described by
Weisburd et al. (2006). For example, in the prostitution site a part of
the catchment area included large public housing complexes, while
there were many fewer residential addresses in the target area. In the
drug and violent crime site, the characteristics of the three areas were
more similar. As described below, regression techniques were used to
control for prior differences in the targeted and catchment areas in the
analyses in this study.
The police intervention
As noted, the police intervention delivered in the displacement
and diffusion project was not explicitly designed as a broken windows
approach. In practice, however, the police activities were consistent
with the broken windows policing approach as they involved
intensive crackdowns on drug activity, prostitution, and street-level
social and physical disorder. In the prostitution site, a team of seven
ofﬁcers were assigned to implement a multifaceted strategy that
included: removing prostitutes from the street, conducting reverse
stings with female ofﬁcers posing as prostitutes to arrest johns for
solicitation (seven reverse stings were conducted during the project,
resulting in twenty to thirty arrests each time), motor vehicle stops,
efforts to clean up physical disorder in problem areas such as vacant
lots that were used by prostitutes, and working with public works to
close off streets to through trafﬁc in an effort to make it more difﬁcult
for johns to cruise through the area.
Similarly, in the drug and violent crime site, a wide-ranging
intervention was delivered that targeted drug and disorder problems.
A nine-ofﬁcer narcotics task force was created to deliver the
intervention, and the department also increased regular patrols in
the target area. A violent offender removal program was also
instituted to get violent offenders out of the neighborhood. In addition
to these strict crackdowns on crime and disorderly behavior, police
also utilized code enforcement to pressure businesses and property
owners to clean up physical disorder problems in the target area, as
well as instituting a neighborhood beautiﬁcation program which
cleaned up an area and built a basketball court.
In sum, while not explicitly broken windows policing, the police
activities in both study sites were consistent with the concept. The
program involved a large increase in police presence in very small
target areas and paid a great deal of attention to cracking down on
social and physical disorder. Importantly, the results presented in the
displacement and diffusion study revealed that the police program led
to a large reduction in disorder in both target sites (Weisburd et al.,
2006). For example, after adjusting for seasonal trends it was found
that observed social disorder in the drug and violent crime
site declined by 60 percent after the intervention had been delivered
(t = -4.76, p-value ≤ .001). Similar declines were seen in the catchment
areas which did not receive the police treatment, suggesting a
diffusion of beneﬁts of the intervention into the nontargeted areas.
Data and variables
The primary dependent variable, resident fear, along with social
and demographic control variables was drawn from a residential
survey. Importantly, though the survey was conducted pre- and postintervention, a panel design was not used. The current analysis was
drawn from 733 interviews conducted during the post-intervention
period. The pre-intervention survey was used to create a block-level
measure of fear that was used as an overall control measure for
preexisting differences in the study. A computerized telephone
directory was used to identify telephone numbers in the target and
catchment areas. Eligible participants were deﬁned as the ﬁrst person
over the age of eighteen in each household who was willing to
participate. Overall, a response rate of 72 percent was obtained. The


interviewees were asked a variety of questions pertaining to crime
and disorder on their block, as well as questions related to their level
of fear and neighborhood satisfaction. Demographic information on
the respondents, including age, race, and gender were also collected.
A team of twelve trained1 research assistants collected social
observations of crime, disorder, and external conditions (weather,
trafﬁc, time, etc.). These social disorder measures were used as a
control measure for the effect of actual disorder on fear. The data base
contained a wealth of data on the social context of the street segments
at the time of the police intervention. The observations were recorded
in nine waves in each site and were randomly assigned by segment
and time during each wave. Each observation lasted for twenty
minutes, and the observer would sit at the center of the street
segment they were observing and record every disorder that occurred
on the coding sheet. Following the use of post-intervention measures
of fear, the 664 social observations collected during the postintervention2 period were used in the current study. Observations
were recorded in both the target and catchment areas of both sites.
In addition to the social observations, another team of research
assistants was trained to collect a series of observations on the
physical conditions of the street segments included in the study.
Again, these physical observations were used to control for actual
block-level physical disorder. These observations included many items
commonly termed physical disorder (Skogan, 1990). As with the social
observations, these data were collected at the street-segment level.
Three observers coded each segment independently. If their coding of
a segment did not match, they then walked the segment again as a
team, discussing areas where they disagreed to ensure that each
segment was coded properly. The 169 physical observations collected
in the post-intervention wave were used in the current study.
The Planning and Research Bureau of the Jersey City Police
Department provided ﬁve years (1996-2000) of police emergency
call data. The data included all citizen and police-initiated calls for
service over this period of time,3 including crime-related calls as well
as other calls (for example, administrative police calls such as
notifying dispatch of going on lunch break). Only crime calls were
used in the current analysis.4
Modeling fear of crime
The main units of analysis in this study were the individual citizens
who were included in the post-intervention resident interview survey.
Some of the independent variables (observed disorder, crime, preintervention fear, and extra police presence), however, were measured
at the street-segment level. The reasoning behind this was that the
level of crime and disorder on a person's block was hypothesized in
this analysis to likely be the most relevant variables for predicting
resident's levels of fear. This is because residents are more likely to be
aware of things happening in their immediate surroundings, rather
than in larger geographic areas such as neighborhoods. Additionally,
the questions on the resident interview survey speciﬁcally asked
respondents about crime, disorder, etc. on their block, making the use
of street-segment level crime and disorder data for independent
variables even more appropriate.
The dependent variable was a four-level ordinal measure of fear of
crime created from responses to a variation of a standard fear question
(see Ferraro, 1995 for review and comments). The question in the
resident interview survey asked respondents how safe they felt
walking alone outside at night on their block. Response options were
“very unsafe, somewhat unsafe, somewhat safe, and very safe.” When
creating the fear variable, this question was recoded so that “very
unsafe” was the high point and “very safe” the low point to make
interpretation of the results more intuitive.
This question has recently come under attack, with critics arguing
that it is a poor measure of fear of crime. Some have argued that this
question taps more into perceptions of risk, than fear of crime (Farrall,
2004; Farrall & Gadd, 2004; Ferraro, 1995). They suggest, instead, that
fear of crime measures should tap into the emotional response to
crime. This is an important issue, as it is possible that questions that
tap into “emotional” fear of crime could lead to different results than
questions which are more aptly described as measures of perceived
risk rather than actual fear. For instance, perhaps some people
perceive a high risk of being victimized on their block, yet still engage
in their normal community activities, while a person who is “afraid” of
crime is more likely to withdraw from the community in response to
this fear. This issue should be explored in future research by including
both fear and perceived risk measures in the same study, and judging
whether choice of question leads to different results for the broken
windows thesis. In the meantime, a perceived risk measure is
appropriate in a study of the broken windows thesis as a reading of
broken windows' literature implies that fear of crime is related to
individuals' concerns about becoming victims of crime in their
neighborhood that arise in response to signs of untended disorder
in their neighborhood. Thus a measure of perceived risk can serve as a
proxy for fear of crime. For simplicity's sake, this measure will be
referred to as fear of crime in this article.
Independent variables
Several independent variables were included in the model. These
included variables the broken windows/incivilities thesis literature
linked to fear of crime, as well as a series of control variables. The main
independent variables of theoretical interest were three measures of
disorder and a variable representing extra police presence.
Observed social disorder was measured at the street-segment level
and was created by aggregating disorder items5 in the social
observations data base from the post-intervention waves. These
aggregations were then averaged by the number of observations
during the corresponding wave to eliminate the confounding problem
of different numbers of observations for each street segment due to
the social observations being randomly assigned.
Perceived social disorder was also included in the model as it is
necessary for residents to actually be aware of disorder for it to have
an impact on their level of fear. The measure of perceived social
disorder was created by constructing a scale from ﬁve questions in the
resident interview survey asking the respondent to rate how often ﬁve
types of social disorder occurred on their block.6
Observed physical disorder was created by summing items7 in the
physical observation data base collected during the post-intervention
wave. With the physical observation data, there was no need to
average the variables before summing them to form the scale as each
street segment received only one physical observation per wave.
Extra police presence is a variable that identiﬁes whether or not the
street segment was subject to the police crackdown. This variable
allows for a test of the impact of the police intervention on fear of
crime among residents of the targeted areas. In addition to these key
variables, several control variables were also included in the model.
Crime was included to control for the direct impact of street-level
crime on resident fear and was created from police calls for service
data.8 While earlier studies found that crime was not related to fear of
crime, it is nevertheless an important part of the broken windows
hypothesis and thus it remains an important variable to include in the
model. Calls for service data from six months prior to the postintervention wave of the resident interview surveys were aggregated
at the street-segment level.9 This was done as it was hypothesized that
crime on a resident's block would be likely to inﬂuence their level of
fear, and a six-month period prior to the interview would be
sufﬁciently long to capture enough crime events at the street-segment
level and not too long for residents to have forgotten them.
Pre-intervention average fear was included because, as noted above,
a panel design was not utilized in the displacement and diffusion
study (Weisburd et al., 2004, 2006). Realizing it important for the

analysis in this article to control for pre-intervention levels of fear, this
issue was addressed by creating a measure of average fear on each
street segment during the pre-intervention period. This variable was
created by summing all the fear responses on a block and dividing by
the number of respondents who completed the pre-intervention
survey on that block. This measure of average fear in the preintervention period added conﬁdence that any differences in fear
found in the analyses were not simply due to some areas having
higher or lower levels of fear during both the pre- and postintervention periods.
Direct and indirect victimization were included in the model as it
was thought that the personal experience of individuals, as well as
experiences of others in their neighborhood, with criminal victimization would be likely to impact their level of fear. Both are dummy
variables representing whether the respondent reported their home
being broken into or being personally attacked during the postintervention resident interview survey and whether they knew
anyone who had been victimized by crime in their neighborhood,
respectively.
Lastly, a series of demographic control variables were also included
in the model. These consisted of age; dummy variables for Black,
Hispanic, other non-White; has children; and owns home; and variables
that represented the number of years at current address and number of
dependents.
Table 1 below lists the descriptive statistics for all the variables
discussed above.
Findings
The main research question examined in this study tested the
relationship between disorder and fear of crime in the context of a
focused police intervention by using post-intervention measures of
disorder and crime as the main independent variables, while
controlling for pre-intervention fear levels on each block. The broken
windows thesis suggested that police could reduce crime by targeting
disorder, as this should reduce resident fear of crime and withdrawal
from the community. The effect of police intervention on fear of crime
was also tested by including extra police presence as an independent
variable in the analysis. As the police intervention signiﬁcantly
reduced disorder as outlined above (see Weisburd et al., 2006 for
full results) the broken windows hypothesis would expect that the
intervention should have a signiﬁcant and negative effect on fear of
crime. These relationships were tested using ordinal logistic regression,10 as fear of crime is measured as a four-level ordinal variable as

outlined above (see Long, 1997).11 The results are shown in Tables 2a
and 2b.12
The results show that perceptions of social disorder13 are
signiﬁcantly related to fear of crime. Those residents who perceive
more social disorder are more fearful. The results also show that
observations of physical disorder are signiﬁcantly and positively
related to fear of crime. Observed social disorder is not signiﬁcant, but
it is likely that this effect is mediated by perceptions of social disorder.
A separate analysis was conducted and revealed that observed social
disorder is signiﬁcantly related to residents' perceptions of disorder,
supporting this mediation hypothesis. The victimization variables are
related to fear of crime in the expected direction, but are not
statistically signiﬁcant. Crime is not related to fear, conﬁrming the
ﬁndings of past studies reviewed above.
Thus the results support the link between disorder and fear of
crime suggested by broken windows theorists. The ﬁndings also show,
however, that extra police presence was signiﬁcantly and positively
related to fear of crime. Thus those living in areas that received the
extra police presence were more fearful than those in other areas,
controlling for levels of crime, disorder, and fear on their block in the
pre-intervention period and various other factors.14 This is troubling
for policymakers as it suggests that any reduction in fear of crime
resulting from broken windows style police crackdowns on disorder in
hot spots may be reduced by the strategies themselves, at least
partially offsetting these reductions.

Magnitude of the relationships between disorder, police presence, and
fear
To further explore the issue at hand, it is necessary to examine and
compare the magnitude of the relationships between disorder, extra
police presence, and fear of crime. With an ordinal logistic regression
model, one of the more intuitive ways to look at the magnitude of the
impacts of covariates is to examine the predicted probabilities and the
discrete change in predicted probabilities for the variables of interest
(see Long, 1997). These are provided below in Table 3, and examine the
difference in probabilities between segments at the minimum and
maximum scores (as well as the minimum and midpoint scores) in
total disorder, with all other covariates held at their means. Fear has
been collapsed into “safe” (very safe or somewhat safe) and “unsafe”
(very unsafe or somewhat unsafe) categories in Table 3 to ease
interpretation. The table also examines the difference between areas
that received extra police presence and those that did not, again
holding all the other covariates at their means.
The results in Table 3 tell a very interesting story. First, they provide
strong evidence for the broken windows hypothesis' argument that
disorder leads to fear of crime as the ﬁndings show that scoring the
maximum on both perceived social disorder (a score of 15) and
observed physical disorder (a score of 7) resulted in a probability of
feeling unsafe that was approximately 57 percent higher than those
scoring at the minimums. Of course it is important to note that this
corresponds to a maximum change which is not particularly likely in
the real world. This is especially true in terms of police interventions
as it is unlikely for police to totally eradicate disorder in targeted
areas.15 For this reason, the difference in moving from the minimum
possible total disorder score to the midpoint (10 on perceived disorder
and 3.5 on physical disorder) was also examined. A midpoint disorder
score is tied to having a probability of feeling unsafe approximately
25 percent higher compared to those living on a minimum disorder
street segment. Following these results, it appears that police could
reduce fear of crime by reducing the levels of social and physical
disorder as argued in the broken windows literature. As such, one
would expect the intervention delivered in this study to have reduced
fear of crime given that it signiﬁcantly impacted the levels of disorder
in the targeted sites.
This is complicated, however, by the second half of the story shown
in Table 3—living in an area that received the extra police presence
(controlling for other factors in the model) was tied to having lower
probabilities of feeling safe and higher probabilities of feeling unsafe.
The results show living in an area that received extra police presence
corresponded to having a probability of feeling unsafe that was
approximately 27 percent higher than those living in a nontargeted
area. To put this into perspective, recall that a street segment at the
midpoint on total disorder, the probability of feeling unsafe was


25 percent higher than a street segment at the minimum, while those
segments at the maximum level of disorder had a probability
57 percent higher.
When considering this with the ﬁnding that the police presence
increased probability of feeling unsafe by 27 percent, these results
suggest that any reductions in fear of crime brought about by police
targeting disorder may be largely offset in areas with moderate
amounts of disorder, and at least partially offset in areas with severe
levels of disorder, by the police intervention itself causing residents to
become more fearful. Thus the types of policing strategies that evolved
from the broken windows literature (i.e., zero tolerance policing and
other types of crackdowns on disorder and minor crime) may have
limited utility in reducing fear of crime. This is intriguing and is
certainly an area that needs further research, as this is an important
issue for police leaders.
Discussion
The ﬁndings presented in this study provide new data for
understanding the broken windows hypothesis, and in particular, for
considering the role of the police in reducing disorder. The data
suggest that two countervailing trends must be considered when
developing broken windows policing strategies. On one hand, the data
support the position that reducing disorder will lead to reductions in
fear. If fear is indeed related to crime outcomes, then this suggests that
the broken windows policing approach has much promise. On the
other hand, however, the results revealed a potentially troubling
relationship between increased police activities and fear itself. Police
crackdowns and other activities associated with broken windows
policing may lead to increased levels of fear, thus possibly offsetting
the beneﬁts of the reduction in disorder that they may engender. This
latter ﬁnding will be the focus of this discussion as it raises a central
challenge to the broken windows policing approach. Can police
crackdowns associated with broken windows policing be carried out
without increasing citizen fear, or can they at least be implemented
while minimizing fear?
While the current study did not have data to explain why fear
increased with increased police activity, it seems to be direct and easy
to understand. Walking on the street and observing police may make
individuals feel safer, but if they notice much greater police attention
on the street block where they live, they are certain to be reminded of
the problems that exist on their street. Additionally, seeing a sudden
increase in police presence on their block may lead residents to infer
that crime has increased and that their block is more dangerous and
crime prone than in the past. Both of these would certainly be
expected to increase fear of crime. In a review of the beneﬁts and
consequences of police crackdowns, a topic closely related to the
policing tactic used in this study and in most broken windows policing
initiatives, Scott (2002) argued that such tactics often heighten fear
among offenders and residents.
The question is, of course, whether one can implement broken
windows style policing approaches in ways that would minimize
increases in citizen fear. Earlier research both on police crackdowns
and community policing suggested that this may be possible, but that
it is important to consider community reactions at the outset. The
Kansas City Gun Experiment, for example, involved door-to-door
visits by police to solicit tips about illegal guns (Sherman & Rogan,
1995). Though this approach was not designed to reduce citizen fear,
the visits informed citizens of why there were more police in the
target area. In this sense, citizens were told directly that police
activities were not developed because of recent increases in crime, but
were carried out to get guns off the street. For citizens who did not
know about the problems in their neighborhood, this could have of
course elicited fear of crime, but it is likely that such visits served to
calm citizen concerns about a problem in their area. In turn, Shaw
(1995) reported that fear was reduced in the Kansas City Gun

Experiment target beat while it increased in the comparison beat. It
important to note, however, that reductions in fear levels were small,
and no regression model was presented to allow for an assessment of
whether the reduction in fear was caused by the increased police
presence in the target beat. Nonetheless, these ﬁndings are also
consistent with other studies that involved increasing community/
police interactions.
A number of studies have found that community policing lowers
the community's level of fear (see Committee to Review Research on
Practice and Policy, 2004; Weisburd & Eck, 2004 for reviews). This was
especially the case when programs were focused on increasing
community-police interaction. A series of quasi-experimental studies,
for example, showed that policing strategies characterized by more
direct involvement of police and citizens, such as citizen contract
patrol, police community stations, and coordinated community
policing have a negative effect on fear of crime among individuals
and on individual levels of concern about crime in the neighborhood
(Brown & Wycoff, 1987; Pate & Skogan, 1985; Skogan & Wycoff, 1986).
Additionally, other studies have shown that community-oriented
policing efforts designed to directly target fear can also be effective
(for example, see Cordner, 1986).
An aspect of community policing that has only recently received
systematic research attention concerns the inﬂuences of police ofﬁcer
behavior toward citizens. A number of scholars have argued that the
“quality” of police contacts with citizens will affect their attitudes
toward the police (see Tyler, 2004). Most research in this area has been
focused on the reactions of offenders to police contacts. For example, a
study based on systematic observations of police-citizen encounters in
Richmond, Virginia found that when ofﬁcers were disrespectful
toward citizens, citizens were less likely to comply with their requests
(Mastrofski, Snipes, & Supina, 1996). This ﬁnding was subsequently
replicated in Indianapolis, Indiana and St. Petersburg, Florida
(McCluskey, Mastrofski, & Parks, 1999). This suggests that the
perceived legitimacy of police actions will also impact upon citizens
who live in an area, and such impact may include elements of fear of
crime.
What these studies suggest is that broken windows policing, if it is
to be successful, must be concerned not only with the effectiveness of
the strategies brought to reduce disorder, but also with the “ways in
which” such strategies are implemented. Broken windows policing
approaches that are detached from the community, and pay little
attention to community sentiment may in some sense be doomed to
failure. Whatever beneﬁts may be gained from cracking down on
disorder may get lost in increased citizen fear of crime. This is not to
say that police crackdowns on disorder should be disregarded.
Strategies that include a strong community element, or at least that
are accompanied by contacts with the community, may be able to
reduce disorder and avoid the backﬁre effects of increased police
activity suggested by the current results. This approach is not
inconsistent with the perspectives of the strong advocates of broken
windows policing. In their seminal book on the subject, Kelling and
Coles (1996) have an entire chapter devoted to illustrating that broken
windows policing is not only congruent with community policing, but
in fact, that involvement with the community is crucial to the success
of order maintenance policing strategies.
While the ﬁndings presented in this study appeared to be robust
and have important implications for broken windows policing, it is
important to note some speciﬁc limitations of the current study before
concluding. First, the study was a secondary analysis of data collected
during the Jersey City Displacement and Diffusion Study (Weisburd
et al., 2004, 2006), and as such was not an explicit test of broken
windows policing. While the policing tactics examined were very
similar to those applied in broken windows policing programs, they
were not designed in the context of such a program.
The fact that the original resident interview survey did not use a
panel design is also an important limitation in drawing conclusions

from this study. Average pre-intervention fear at the block level was
used as a method for adjusting for preexisting differences in the
analyses reported here. Nonetheless, a panel design would have
provided a direct method for adjusting for within subject differences in fear. A related drawback of the present design was that it
did not employ a randomized experimental design. Though this
study included a number of measures that had not been available in
prior studies of disorder and fear (e.g., using measures of observed
physical and social disorder during a police crackdown on disorder),
absent a randomized experiment, it was not possible to assume that
all important confounding variables were controlled for in the
analyses. A study utilizing an experimental design (Campbell &
Boruch, 1975; Farrington, 1983; Weisburd, 2003) that would
randomly allocate police presence to crime places would provide a
more valid test of the effects of broken windows policing on fear of
crime.
Finally, when considering the implications of the ﬁndings for
broken windows hypothesis, it is important to recall that the results of
this study only tested and found support for the ﬁrst portion of the
hypothesis which deals with the link between disorder and fear. As
noted above, the evidence regarding the effects of broken windows
policing on serious crime is inconclusive. Even if the police can reduce
incivilities without increasing fear of crime, it is critical to develop
more systematic and direct evidence of the long-term impacts of
broken windows policing on crime.
Conclusions
This study provided evidence for the broken windows policing
hypothesis that disorder leads to fear of crime. Examining fear of
crime among citizens at a micro-place unit of analysis revealed that
higher levels of both perceived social disorder and observed physical
disorder led to signiﬁcantly higher levels of fear of crime. For those
advocating broken windows policing approaches, however, the data
also suggest reason for caution. Those living in an area that received
the extra police presence (controlling for other factors in the model)
also reported higher levels of fear. When considering these ﬁndings
together, the results suggest that reductions in fear of crime brought
about by police targeting of disorder may be largely offset in areas
with moderate amounts of disorder, and at least partially offset in
areas with severe levels of disorder, by the extra police presence itself
causing residents to be more fearful.
It is important to note, however, that these ﬁndings do not lead to a
conclusion that broken windows policing approaches will inevitably
fail in their efforts to reduce fear of crime. Rather, they suggest the
importance of “how” broken windows policing programs are
implemented. Such programs must be geared not only to reduce
disorder, but also to prevent increases in citizen fear that may
accompany crackdowns and other intensive enforcement efforts
associated with broken windows policing. The police must communicate with citizens and explain their efforts. In this sense, they need
to gain legitimacy in the areas where they police. The current study
suggests that this is not simply a luxury, but rather a key to the
effectiveness of broken windows policing.
Acknowledgments
This research was supported in part by a grant from the National
Institute of Justice (NIJ Grant #: 98-IJ-CX-0070). The authors would
like to thank the anonymous reviewers and Laura Dugan, Gary
LaFree, Stephen Mastrofski, Jean McGloin, and Lorraine Mazerolle for
their helpful comments on early versions of this manuscript. The
authors would also like to thank Laura Wyckoff and Sue-Ming Yang
for their help with data preparation and analysis, as well as providing
many thoughtful comments on study design and early drafts of this
article.


Notes
1. Observers were given a code book and were taught how to code various disorder
activities. After the lesson and having time to study the code book, they were tested
using hypothetical situations that they had to code. They were also instructed only to
code items that happened on their street segment, and it was made certain that they
knew the boundary of the segments they were observing each shift. The observers
were also told not to code any activity ambiguous enough to require guesswork.
2. Two post-intervention waves of social observations were recorded in the violent
crime/drug site. Only data from the ﬁrst, immediate post-intervention wave were used
in the current study. Only one post-intervention wave of observations was collected in
the prostitution site.
3. Some days were missing in the data, and it was discovered that these days were
also missing in the general records of the Jersey City Police Department Crime Analysis
Unit, suggesting a problem with their computer-aided dispatch system. It was decided
that there was enough data present to solve this problem by averaging the calls per day
for the days in the month that data were present for and to then impute these values
into the missing days. For more details on this, see Weisburd et al. (2004).
4. It was decided to use calls for service data rather than crime incidence or arrest
data in an effort to include the largest number of crime events. Calls for service data is
sometimes criticized as it can potentially contain unsubstantiated crimes. Calls for
service, however, appeared to be the most appropriate measure for the current study
as they contained the most events and could also be considered a proxy of resident’s
perceptions of crime levels on their blocks as it is a measure of the number of times the
police were called by citizens regarding a speciﬁc crime occurring on each street
segment. As this article argues that residents’ perceptions of crime and disorder are
most relevant to determining their fear levels, calls for service were deemed to be the
most appropriate source of crime data for this study.
5. The social disorder items were counts of the following items: the number of
people loitering, the number of verbal disorders, the number of loud disputes, the
number of people noticeably drunk, the number of people drinking in public, the
number of homeless people, and the number of loud noises.
6. The ﬁve items included in the perceived disorder measure asked how often each
of the following types of disorder occurred on their block: youths hanging out and
being disorderly, public drinking, panhandling, people damaging property, and
gambling in the street. All ﬁve items were three-level ordinal measures with responses
of “1 = not at all, 2 = sometimes, 3 = often.” The ﬁve variables were summed, creating a
scale ranging from 5 to 15.
7. The physical disorder items included in the scale measured: burned, boarded up
or abandoned buildings, buildings with broken windows, vacant lots, buildings with
structural damage, buildings with grafﬁti, broken glass on streets or sidewalks, and
litter. Rather than being captured as counts, as with the social observation data, the
original coding of physical observations varied from item to item. For this analysis, the
items were recoded into dummy variables which represented the speciﬁc physical
disorder item being rated as either “moderate or heavy” on the street segment, or
being present on 30 percent or more of the block/buildings on the segment, depending
on which measurement scale was originally used. The only exception was broken
windows, where the dummy variable represented the presence of one or more broken
windows on the street segment. These dummy variables were then summed, creating
a physical disorder scale ranging from 0 to 7.
8. The crime variable included all calls for service for the following call codes:
assault no weapon, assault weapon, homicide, hostage/barricade, kidnapping, robbery
commercial, robbery ﬁnancial, robbery person, robbery residence, sexual assault adult,
sexual assault minor, theft from person, domestic dispute, burglary of other structure,
burglary of public property, burglary of residential property, motor vehicle theft, theft
of other property, theft of property from vehicle, shots ﬁred heard, ﬁrearm person
with, prostitution, use or sale of drugs, and weapon-person with.
9. One issue that arose was that some calls got coded to an intersection rather than
a street address which made it difﬁcult to code the call to a particular street segment.
This was handled by dividing the number of calls at each intersection by the number of
street segments coming together at that location. If there were twenty crimes coded at
an intersection, for example, and four street segments came together at that location,
each segment would have ﬁve crimes added to its total. In the case that the
intersection was on the border of the study site, and one or more of the segments was
not in the study site, these outside segments would be included in the division of calls
at the intersection and their share of the crimes would simply be excluded from the
analysis. For instance, if one of the four segments was outside the study site in the
above example, each of the three segments in the site would have ﬁve crimes added to
their total. The ﬁve calls that would have gone on the fourth segment would simply be
excluded from the analysis.
10. It is important to note that there was some clustering in the current data. This
study examined individual fear of crime regressed on independent variables that were
sometimes measured at the street-segment level—thus individuals were nested within
street segments. As such, it was possible that the use of methods that did not account for
clustering could bias the standard errors upward and thus increase the risk for Type II error.
This risk did not appear to be a major threat to this study, however, given the small size of
clusters in the data. The street segments in this study contained from one to twenty-seven
resident interview respondents, with 66 percent street segments having ten or fewer
respondents. To be cautious, however, the ordinal regression model was run in Stata using
the cluster command to adjust the standard errors for clustering by street segment.

511

11. Note that the N in this analysis was 438, which was lower than the total
number of post-intervention surveys (N = 733) due to missing values. First, there were
missing values in the dependent variable due to nonresponse to the fear question.
Deleting cases with no data for the dependent variable dropped the N from 733 to 662.
Second, this number decreased further due to missing data on independent variables.
A missing value analysis was performed and found that there were no clear patterns to
missing data. Additionally, when comparing the means of independent variables with
whole sample and with missing value cases excluded, it was found that the means
changed little regardless of which sample was used and thus the missing data should
not affect the results of the current study. As such, it was decided to simply exclude the
cases with missing values from the analyses.
12. In order to test for multicollinearity, the model was run as an OLS regression to
allow for an examination of VIF and tolerance. All were well within the accepted
ranges, suggesting multicollinearity was not a problem in the model.
13. It is important to note that perceptions of physical disorder were not included
in the model as there were no questions relating to physical disorder on the resident
interview survey. Thus it was possible that perceptions of physical disorder could also
inﬂuence fear of crime; however, it was likely that perceptions of physical disorder
would not vary as much as perceptions of social disorder among residents of a
particular street segment since physical disorder is more stable across time and place
than social disorder. Unruly youth, for example, may be present on a resident’s block
occasionally, but the grafﬁti on the wall is there 24/7 until it is removed. Unfortunately
this issue could not be examined with the current data.
14. Average levels of fear at the block level before and after the intervention were
also examined. It was important to note, however, that there was very high block-toblock variability in the number of surveys conducted. In approximately 19 percent of
the blocks, fewer than three surveys were actually completed in the post-intervention
period, while other blocks had as many as twenty-seven completed surveys. The very
low number of responses on many blocks made a speciﬁc block-level analysis of the
data suspect. Nonetheless, a review of average block-level changes showed a small
increase in fear in the target areas and a small decrease in the catchment areas.
15. See Sherman and Weisburd (1995) and Weisburd et al. (2006) for examples of
studies that examined focused police crackdowns on disorder in high disorder areas
and found that disorder was reduced, but not eliminated, by the interventions.
