The irony of broken windows policing: A micro-place study of the relationship
between disorder, focused police crackdowns and fear of crime
Joshua C. This study aimed to improve knowledge of the relationship between disorder and
fear of crime in the context of the broken windows hypothesis by using a micro-place level research design
involving a police crackdown on disorder and minor crime at hot spots. The results of the current study
suggest that perceived social disorder and observed levels of physical disorder have a strong impact on fear of
crime. This conﬁrms the relationship between disorder and fear hypothesized by the broken windows
literature, and implies that police may be able to reduce fear of crime by reducing disorder. Its main thesis is that the targeting of disorder and
nuisance crimes (which generally gained little police attention in the
reactive, professional model of policing) provides the key to the longterm reduction of violent crime. Such methods have
included issuing citations and arrests for disorderly behavior, loitering, and any number of other disorders and minor crimes that the
police are likely to ignore in standard policing practices (e.g., Kelling &
Sousa, 2001;
Additionally, it is important from the perspective of the broken
windows thesis to examine the relationship between disorder and
fear in the context of a police intervention involving crackdowns on
disorder, as the thrust of Wilson and Kelling's (1982) seminal article
was that police can better reduce fear and crime by targeting
incivilities. While the broken windows idea certainly is relevant to
the development of communities irrespective of policing approaches
(see Skogan, 1990), Wilson and Kelling clearly saw the police as a
central part of community efforts to prevent the cycle of fear and
crime by targeting disorder, stating that “(t)hough citizens can do a
great deal, the police are clearly the key to order maintenance” (p. As such,
an important question to answer is whether focused police crackdowns in disorder hot spots can reduce fear of crime among residents
of the targeted areas.
The use of observed measures of physical and social disorder as well as
residents' perceptions of disorder on street segments allowed for an
assessment of not only the effect of disorder on fear, but importantly,
also allowed for an assessment of the impact that police efforts to
reduce disorder have on fear of crime. This point is especially important in relation to
broken windows policing strategies because, if true, it means that
focused policing crackdowns on disorder may actually increase fear of
crime, and thus offset any fear reduction beneﬁts that may be gained
by reducing disorder. As such,
they suggested that police should focus resources on cracking down
on disorder and minor crimes before they cause serious crime
problems to arise in a neighborhood.
While broken windows theories emphasize the importance of the
link between disorder and fear of crime, a review of the literature
suggests that interest in the topic was not introduced by broken
windows theorists, but rather was sparked in large part by numerous
studies which found that fear of crime did not appear to be linked to
ofﬁcial crime rates or actual victimization risks. The notion that fear of crime is not tied to crime rates or
victimization risks was further supported by the observation that
although fear goes up as crime goes up, it does not fall as rapidly when
crime declines (Taylor & Hale, 1986). This is a reasonable criticism as the lack of a relationship
between disorder and crime would essentially refute the utility of
policing strategies focusing on disorder. More recent work has
responded to this critique by stating that broken windows theory
does not argue for a direct relationship between disorder and crime,
but rather that the theory has always asserted that the relationship is
indirect through fear of crime and its accompanying impact on
informal social controls (Bratton & Kelling, 2006; While Taylor found evidence
of a link between disorder and crime, he argued that disorder did not
have a particularly strong impact on block-level crime changes over
time when compared with initial community structure or crime rates. Moreover, given the key role of fear in the
broken windows thesis outlined above, it is unfortunate that empirical
tests of broken windows policing have been largely limited to
examining its impact on crime and disorder. For this reason, it is crucial to examine a critical
intervening variable in the broken windows policing model—the
effect of these policing efforts on citizen fear of crime.

Broken windows policing
Past studies of police impact on fear
While broken windows policing is widely perceived as an
important and effective new policing strategy, and has been given
credit in good part for the crime drop in New York City in the 1990s
(Bratton & Knobler, 1998; Speciﬁcally, many studies of community-oriented policing have
found effects on fear of crime even when effects on crime were lacking
(see Committee to Review Research on Practice and Policy, 2004; If the police strategy itself increases fear of
crime, it may well offset any fear reduction beneﬁts gained by the police
crackdown lowering the level of disorder. Disorder
may still be related to crime, but if it does not impact fear of crime,
then it is not related to crime in the speciﬁc manner suggested by
Wilson and Kelling (1982). In such a case, the focusing of police
resources on disorder may be misguided and unlikely to have the
intended impacts on fear and serious crime, even if the police are able
to reduce disorder. The current study examined the link between
disorder and individual fear of crime at the micro level following a
police crackdown on disorder in an effort to better understand the
relationship between these variables in the context of the broken
windows thesis. These catchment
areas did not gain extra police presence, and police activities were
carefully monitored to avoid spillover of policing strategies into the
catchment areas. In practice, however, the police activities were consistent
with the broken windows policing approach as they involved
intensive crackdowns on drug activity, prostitution, and street-level
social and physical disorder. In addition
to these strict crackdowns on crime and disorderly behavior, police
also utilized code enforcement to pressure businesses and property
owners to clean up physical disorder problems in the target area, as
well as instituting a neighborhood beautiﬁcation program which
cleaned up an area and built a basketball court. In the meantime, a perceived risk measure is
appropriate in a study of the broken windows thesis as a reading of
broken windows' literature implies that fear of crime is related to
individuals' concerns about becoming victims of crime in their
neighborhood that arise in response to signs of untended disorder
in their neighborhood.
Crime was included to control for the direct impact of street-level
crime on resident fear and was created from police calls for service
data.8 While earlier studies found that crime was not related to fear of
crime, it is nevertheless an important part of the broken windows
hypothesis and thus it remains an important variable to include in the
model.
Findings
The main research question examined in this study tested the
relationship between disorder and fear of crime in the context of a
focused police intervention by using post-intervention measures of
disorder and crime as the main independent variables, while
controlling for pre-intervention fear levels on each block. The broken
windows thesis suggested that police could reduce crime by targeting
disorder, as this should reduce resident fear of crime and withdrawal
from the community. The effect of police intervention on fear of crime
was also tested by including extra police presence as an independent
variable in the analysis. As the police intervention signiﬁcantly
reduced disorder as outlined above (see Weisburd et al., 2006 for
full results) the broken windows hypothesis would expect that the
intervention should have a signiﬁcant and negative effect on fear of
crime. Thus those living in areas that received the
extra police presence were more fearful than those in other areas,
controlling for levels of crime, disorder, and fear on their block in the
pre-intervention period and various other factors.14 This is troubling
for policymakers as it suggests that any reduction in fear of crime
resulting from broken windows style police crackdowns on disorder in
hot spots may be reduced by the strategies themselves, at least
partially offsetting these reductions.

Magnitude of the relationships between disorder, police presence, and
fear
To further explore the issue at hand, it is necessary to examine and
compare the magnitude of the relationships between disorder, extra
police presence, and fear of crime. First, they provide
strong evidence for the broken windows hypothesis' argument that
disorder leads to fear of crime as the ﬁndings show that scoring the
maximum on both perceived social disorder (a score of 15) and
observed physical disorder (a score of 7) resulted in a probability of
feeling unsafe that was approximately 57 percent higher than those
scoring at the minimums. This is especially true in terms of police interventions
as it is unlikely for police to totally eradicate disorder in targeted
areas.15 For this reason, the difference in moving from the minimum
possible total disorder score to the midpoint (10 on perceived disorder
and 3.5 on physical disorder) was also examined. Following these results, it appears that police could
reduce fear of crime by reducing the levels of social and physical
disorder as argued in the broken windows literature.
When considering this with the ﬁnding that the police presence
increased probability of feeling unsafe by 27 percent, these results
suggest that any reductions in fear of crime brought about by police
targeting disorder may be largely offset in areas with moderate
amounts of disorder, and at least partially offset in areas with severe
levels of disorder, by the police intervention itself causing residents to
become more fearful. Thus the types of policing strategies that evolved
from the broken windows literature (i.e., zero tolerance policing and
other types of crackdowns on disorder and minor crime) may have
limited utility in reducing fear of crime. Police
crackdowns and other activities associated with broken windows
policing may lead to increased levels of fear, thus possibly offsetting
the beneﬁts of the reduction in disorder that they may engender. Can police
crackdowns associated with broken windows policing be carried out
without increasing citizen fear, or can they at least be implemented
while minimizing fear? In a review of the beneﬁts and
consequences of police crackdowns, a topic closely related to the
policing tactic used in this study and in most broken windows policing
initiatives, Scott (2002) argued that such tactics often heighten fear
among offenders and residents. A series of quasi-experimental studies,
for example, showed that policing strategies characterized by more
direct involvement of police and citizens, such as citizen contract
patrol, police community stations, and coordinated community
policing have a negative effect on fear of crime among individuals
and on individual levels of concern about crime in the neighborhood
(Brown & Wycoff, 1987; In their seminal book on the subject, Kelling and
Coles (1996) have an entire chapter devoted to illustrating that broken
windows policing is not only congruent with community policing, but
in fact, that involvement with the community is crucial to the success
of order maintenance policing strategies. Though this
study included a number of measures that had not been available in
prior studies of disorder and fear (e.g., using measures of observed
physical and social disorder during a police crackdown on disorder),
absent a randomized experiment, it was not possible to assume that
all important confounding variables were controlled for in the
analyses. Weisburd, 2003) that would
randomly allocate police presence to crime places would provide a
more valid test of the effects of broken windows policing on fear of
crime. Even if the police can reduce
incivilities without increasing fear of crime, it is critical to develop
more systematic and direct evidence of the long-term impacts of
broken windows policing on crime. Examining fear of
crime among citizens at a micro-place unit of analysis revealed that
higher levels of both perceived social disorder and observed physical
disorder led to signiﬁcantly higher levels of fear of crime. When considering these ﬁndings
together, the results suggest that reductions in fear of crime brought
about by police targeting of disorder may be largely offset in areas
with moderate amounts of disorder, and at least partially offset in
areas with severe levels of disorder, by the extra police presence itself
causing residents to be more fearful. (2006) for examples of
studies that examined focused police crackdowns on disorder in high disorder areas
and found that disorder was reduced, but not eliminated, by the interventions.
